You're listening to radio on New York public radio, public radio,
W
[inaudible]
[inaudible] [inaudible]
do you know this music? Trust me.
You've heard it your entire life.
[inaudible]
the reason you can't recognize it now is because the composer born in 1770
intended for this moment. The one you're hearing to last two seconds.
[inaudible]
however, had he been a whale,
Beethoven might've written his ninth symphony this way.
[inaudible]
changes that for us. We're taking an instant,
we transpire over minutes and a movement might last six hours.
That's in fact what this is.
Beethoven's Ninth Symphony digitally stretched from its normal 60 some odd
minutes to last an entire day, 24 hours
and if you sit for the entire 24 hour duration of the piece as people do from
time to time, you realize that this music is not simply slower.
The Sloane is unlocked something in the original,
maybe it was there all long and we couldn't hear it.
Play with the meter. Music is mostly about me and after all,
music has a different story to tell. A secret,
perhaps locked up and signed the routine, changed the routine.
You make new discoveries.
That's what we'll do this hour. We'll look at time so closely.
We'll discover new things about it.
[inaudible]
this is Radiolab.
I'm Jad Abumrad my guest tonight for the next hour to help me wrestle with time
is the science correspondent,
Robert Krulwich of ABC News and Nova and Nightline. How are you sir?
I'm very well. I like this bathing and Beethoven thing.
You've got gone to school, right? Yeah. Actually at the end of the program,
we will be dropping in on a performance that happened recently in San Francisco
where people listen to it over the course of an entire day, like day a day.
So we're first, let's begin with a guy who I think you'll find, well,
he thinks very deeply about time. In fact, in a very general kind of way,
you could say he's time obsessed. You've heard of the neurologist,
Oliver's hacks. Sure. The man who mistook his wife for a hat. Yeah. Right.
And a weakness. So I was over at his house.
This is me actually over at his house right now. Cherokee attorney. Um,
and he told me this story. I don't know whether this is relevant.
I had an odd experience some years, in fact, in 1993
when I got a, um, a message from my publisher,
which they had sent out to various of their authors for their 21st birthday,
they're jubilee asking if we would like to select a year from the previous 21
years and write about it. Um, when I got this message, I thought, well,
why don't I choose 1972, which was the first of the year as an as a year,
which is, uh, um,
very vivid and important for me,
partly because it was the year in which my mother died.
Partly it was the year in which I complete it awakenings. And these two events,
uh, were coupled in some ways.
I was actually in the car when I got this message.
I picked it up on a car phone and I was driving up to Canada and I had a tape
recorder with me. So I, um,
I spoke 1972 aloud and by that time,
uh, I thought, well, why stop? Why don't I do in 1973 as well? Um,
by the time long 72 take, did you get to Montreal or we you just, no, no, I'm,
I'm, I'm a 72 probably took about about, um, half an hour. Well,
by the time I got to the Canadian border, um, I was up to 1987.
Um, and, um,
I didn't fact make an extra loop so that I could compute things. Um,
however it turned out that the,
the most recent years in the late eighties and the nineties,
I did not apparently have such detailed memories of,
and they seem subjectively shorter. So time,
I guess we all know this is a very plastic thing.
It's small and enriched some of the time and it's like flacid and other times.
But because Oliver is so inquisitive, such an investigator at heart,
all his life,
he's looked inside things and beginning when he was 10,
live in 12, he wanted to get inside time. I had, I had, um,
lots of boyish interests. Uh, and um, you know,
there's pre-adolescent interests.
They all took a beating when I became an adolescent. But, uh,
but one of them was chemicals and I had a chemistry laboratory.
One of them was photography and I had dark woman cameras and one of them was
plants.
And in particular my mother was very fond of firms and the garden was full of
firms. I love the way in which the, um,
the curled up fiddleheads or cruises or firms would unfurl.
And it was almost as if time was sort of rolled up inside of them as if time
itself unfilled. But when couldn't actually see this,
they would peps take a a day or two to do this. And I wanted to see it.
It made me think of these Christmas things.
One would blow and these are paper trumpets, which would protrude unfold.
And so I, uh,
set up my camera on a tripod and at least in the daytime I couldn't take
pictures at night. I didn't have a flash.
Then I took a series of pictures every hour or so of the fun.
And that showed these rapidly by putting them together in the flipbook and this
way.
Then what took a day or two or several hours to happen was compressed into
several seconds.
So the compression of time photographically fascinated me
as to if Oliver sacks can make a baby. Fern unfurl. Robert,
how about this radio producer?
Tony Schwartz can do the same thing with his baby niece. What?
Except in sound. Oh, here's sped up for your appreciation.
Is Nancy Schwartz from birth to age 12 in two minutes. 12 seconds.
Exactly.
Yep.
Okay.
Hong Kong.
Hello.
Okay. Huh.
Okay.
Huh?
[inaudible] text next year.
I've been discovering boys
[inaudible]
you know what that is? Was that, that is, if you repair it,
what you've just heard is a parent clock, a parent clock.
That's Kinda cool cause the kid gets older.
You can't deny the fact that you must be getting older too when your son has
hair on his legs. I though, Oh man,
I'm getting old. But this is true. This is how the whole world works.
I think it's a, it's a, everything is a clock, I guess. Yeah. By the way,
that was Nancy grows up in the audio flip book recorded and arranged by the
great radio producer, Tony Schwartz,
thanks to him and to Smithsonian folkways recordings and also to you Mr Ronald
Crow, which for joining me today on our program to talk about time.
So here's my question.
If we've got an example of what you just called a parent clock,
you've got other kinds of time, you know like PR,
like personal time getting out of bed time. Yeah. Most of the existence really
time was measured by, oh it's lunchtime. It's wake up time, right?
It's time to milk the cow time events are task time, tasks, times.
How do we get from task and personal time to clock time.
Oh that's interesting.
Let's go back to the 18 hundreds and imagine a guy,
we'll call him all Zoltan. Trib wagon. Zero to a hundred yes.
Living in Sandusky, Ohio. And suppose old time wants to know.
You know what time it is. Okay. So if Zoltan walked into
to say bigsbys tavern and asked, I missed the big city, can I trouble you?
Put the time. It's right in front of you. You've seen his pocket.
It's built by my nephew, not this modest boy in.
Well it says 33 minutes past the hour. Is that right?
Of course it's right.
However, if Zoltan instead of going into the tavern,
had he gone at the exact same moment into the bank building,
how can I help you sir?
And I wondered if you could show me time to read minutes past the hour.
Is he right though? Easy to write or at that very same moment.
Suppose instead of going to this habit of the bank, he'd gone to the hotel.
Can I help you?
Can you tell me the time? Yes, of course. My, my time piece has,
is that shit? It's sort of a style. Actually, it's 19 past the hour.
So at the tavern it's 33 past the hour at the hotel. 19 past the bank.
Three past. What time is it really in Santa Husky? That's the question.
The answer is there was no official time in San Dusky. Huh? What do you mean?
There's no official time and center? There wasn't any. Not In 1850
the government didn't have a time. Really all there were were clocks.
So in Ohio in the 1850s you'd have as many times as they were clocks in the
town. So there was no reason when you think about it to synchronize, if,
if your clock and my clock were four minutes or 10 minutes different in Sandusky
in 1850s who cares until
the railroad change every one once the wheel road clean in.
If Zoltan wanted to take out a, how about the a three or three to Cleveland?
Okay. If you wanted to take the fields we believe in,
how would he know when it was three Oh three Oh I see where you're going with
this. If you went by the bank's clock, he'd arrive a half hour ahead of time.
If you went by the hotel clock heater arrived, the Nicotine, oh wait, wait,
wait. And if you went by the taverns clock.
Oh Wow.
So for the sake of their business,
meaning the real roads created railroad time and began putting up clocks of
their own. It makes sense. And because the railroads were so important, I mean,
the tavern would, you have to get its beer deliveries from the railroad.
And I guess the banks would have to get their cash from the railroad and the
hotel would have to get their guests when they're at road.
So it gradually reload time becomes everybody's time.
So what happened to local time? Will local time disappeared. Really? Yeah.
If local time means that when it's noon in Sandusky,
the sun is directly over your head. By 1880 that wasn't true anymore.
Oh,
the railroad had instructed Sandusky that from now on it's noon would be 20
minutes later. So that could fit into the railroad schedule. Wait,
so they moved noon over 20 minutes. Yeah. And they were protests about this.
I put it to do ladies and gentlemen.
[inaudible]
so in all seriousness, people fought against this.
They rebelled against the railroads. Oh,
there were time wars in certain towns where part of the town would go to
railroad time. But the other part would determinately stick with the,
what used to be local time and they'd have different times in the town. Wow.
It's almost like as a personal freedom, it's, yeah,
because time in a way represents your own identity and they were,
didn't want to give up their identity to the railroad. Not at first,
but in the end,
Sandusky and then every other town eventually conformed to railroad time and
that is how time became standardized. Time became zoned.
Time became clock reference and you ask somebody, what time is it?
They don't say, you know, oh, it's bedtime or it's lunchtime.
They don't look up at the side.
They look at the standard and the [inaudible].
Yeah, brief pick, go. The clock is time. One off every 60 minutes.
Tweet every 12 hour tour of old, relentless hands, turning out car carload.
Lots of time.
There's an interesting connection to explore here and it has to do with horses,
horses, horses.
You mentioned railroad companies.
It just so happens that the owner of the biggest ramp of the company,
Leland Stanford, you know I know Stanford University University, right?
He was really into speed and he owned a really fast horse and the horse,
his name is oxidant oxidant. I know, I remember that story goes. This horse
was the subject of a gentleman's bet. Well there was no gentleman's bet.
It's a myth. Danford so far as we know was not a betting man.
That's Rebecca Solnit. She would know.
She wrote a book about this called River of shadows.
And the focus of her book is the solver of the bet. Oh, I got hurt.
It was an argument. There's no evidence that there was money on it. In any case,
this argument amongst Stanford and his railroad buddies centered around the
following question. When a horse gallops,
do all four of its feet leave the ground at once? When do you think?
I don't know. I'm just not a question. I would frankly every, I was getting one,
but,
well at the time it was a big question cause they had no way of knowing cause
horses moved faster than eyeballs can see.
So Leland Stanford wanted to prove that a horse had all four feet off the ground
at one time and he was recommended to try my bridge as the photographer to
capture this. Along comes Edward Muybridge, the photographer.
If he could take a picture of the voice, that exactly the right instant,
you could see whether all four feet were off the ground and solve the bed.
Here's the problem. Cameras in those days were very slow.
A fast exposure would be maybe a second or several seconds.
My vision was going to push photography to suddenly be able to capture motion in
a 500th of a second. Otherwise you've just got blur.
Imagine that first step out of the world of a blur when bread,
she had stretched a wire across the race track and attached it to the shutter
mechanism on his camera. Oxidant the horse gallops by trips.
The wire
[inaudible],
which freezes the horse nit gala,
steals him right out of the flow of time.
[inaudible]
except my bridge doesn't just take one photo.
He takes 24 c it place 24 cameras in a line,
one after the other with 24 trip wires stretching across the racetrack and the
horse trip. Every one.
Yeah,
24 frozen and blurry mining horses. So what did, what did they see?
Well,
the pictures formed a series of a horse running and some of those photos showed
oxidant yes, with all four feet off the ground.
So the camera here unlocks a secret.
It lets us see something you could never see before because this camera
essentially, it stops time. Exactly. Meanwhile, it says,
Rebecca morbridge became fascinated with learning more secrets of time,
secrets locked inside the basic human movements. No leap a splash,
a walk of parallel at wow. Mundane.
But they're so enchanted when you really pay attention to them. Yeah. Boy,
preach had photograph rushing water.
He was obsessed with water in his landscape. Pictures.
So you obsessive Lee has people pour water, splash water,
pour water over themselves, poor pictures of water, pour water into glasses,
splash water out of basins, bathe in water.
And you can see all these droplets frozen in [inaudible].
There's one
particular photo, Robert,
where you see a sheet of water suspended in the air hovering over the splasher.
Kinda like a ghost. Hmm. Oh Wow. Anyhow,
take all those frozen moments and align them one after the other and play them
back and you've got flow again. I'll be at artificial flow,
which we call movies.
[inaudible] movies are good. Yeah. Yeah.
The next time you're feeling stressed out, you saved yourself. I'm stressed.
I need to go to a movie to relax. Well,
you should know that the technology that made the movies is exactly the thing
which sped up the pace of modern life, which stressed you out,
which led you to go to the movies. Don't, what does that mean? What do you,
what do you mean by that?
Well one of the first ways movies were used was to film factory workers doing
repetitive tasks and then find out how to make those tasks more efficient.
So if I were pushing the lever, maybe too slowly is this right?
They would find the guy who did it the right way, film him,
slow the film down and then use that to teach everyone else.
And then when World War II came,
this was not just now in the cause of efficiency.
This was a life or death matter. Cause this is how you beat Nazis.
All the scientific devices. I'm chronology, I'm a senior.
The manufacturing time and towards it in all hands mean victory and all hands
must be as we [inaudible]
or there's a whole nother way to think about this.
Time can be a weapon in battle or it can be the most sensuous and subtle and
natural thing in the world.
And I learned about this from a book by Jay Griffiths called a sideways look at
time. Let me just take a stop here at the clocks,
even though you don't like clocks because there's so many cool clocks in your
book. First of all, there's a spice clock.
Yes, we're used to clocks,
which you can see when it's really dark and it's seen and you can see that
you've just woken up at two 35 and you really didn't want to wake up at two 35
but of course for a long time, you know,
in the night you don't have a way of seeing, um, what the time is.
And so somebody invented a spice cock so you could taste your way through the
nights. So there would be maybe kind of, you know,
cinnamon for about one o'clock and Turmeric for two o'clock.
You're sitting there in bed and you stiff the time. Oh, you could taste it.
Right. How about the clock of birds? This is the [inaudible]
actually the Colonia people apart when you're getting,
they have what they call a clock of birds and that certain birds like the um,
New Guinea fryer bird and the hooded butch. But when they sing in the mornings,
the children are taught to understand that that's a signal to get up and leave
the house.
Wow.
When those
birds sing the late afternoon calls,
that's a signal to the children to go back home.
The forest in the central orange in Papua New Guinea. I've seen that as a very,
very, um,
difficult place to be in once it's dog and that the children would need to know
about what time to start heading for home
now.
How about it's 1751 and Carl Linnaeus famous catalog categorize her of
everything. Yes. Sweden
clock. What do you make in a flower clock so that you could,
you could see by the blooming of different flowers, um, what time it was.
So some kind of something that blooms in the morning and then folds up like a
morning glory would be there in the morning and then in the evening and evening
primrose would come out and these are all plants that open for an hour or two
and then close.
So if you're walking by and you see a blush of let's say pink,
then you know, oh, it must be in the morning.
Or if you see a blush of privilege, oh, it must be lunchtime or whatever it is.
Yes, exactly. Exactly. That's by the way, very,
very good gardening to be able to do that. Yes, isn't it? Isn't it?
And connected to that, there's also the, um,
Andaman forest and the Andaman islands in the Indian Ocean. Um,
the people have a scent calendar, which I found the most beautiful idea because,
um,
what it was is a way of kind of describing the months by the sense of certain
fruits and flowers.
Hello
time at time is everywhere in nature. What I put at,
one of the things I wanted to do with the whole book was to say, you know,
we think of time being to do with clocks. In fact, for most of the world,
for most of history time has been absolutely embedded in nature in some
beautiful ways.
[inaudible]
we'll hear more from Arthur j Griffiths later in the program. Thanks, Robert.
Yeah, thank you. I'm Jad Abumrad Robert Krulwich tonight.
We'll be back in a moment.
You're listening to radio lab on New York public radio, public radio,
W and
[inaudible].
This is Matt [inaudible] and Alyssa. Old Crow in Gainesville, Florida.
And Radiolab is supported in part by the National Science Foundation and by the
Alfred p Sloan Foundation enhancing public understanding of science and
technology in the modern world.
More information aboutSloan@wwwdotsloan.org.
Thanks.
Hey, this is jad from Radiolab. We're having a, uh,
we're celebrating little milestone over here at radio lab.
We have been doing this when making stories for the podcast,
for the radio for 15 years at is 15 years of stories about like um,
I don't know, the science of morality, the metamorphosis of butterflies,
legal foundation for the war on terror. All these different stories.
I've been doing it for years. So check out
our latest episode out of the archives in all of our episodes are available
wherever you get your podcasts
on. Chad having Rod. This is radio lab. Our program today is about time.
All the different flavors of time in here with me to,
shall we say taste those flavors is Robert Krulwich correspondent for ABC News
Nightline. Yeah. Hi Robert.
We've been talking about clocks for the last 20 minutes and if you took all the
clock counting 20 minutes exactly. If he took away all the clocks.
We've been talking about the bird clock and the spice clock and the clock on the
wall and then you had to talk about time without mentioning a clock.
What are we left with? How would you, ah, that's actually pretty tough question.
What is climb essentially or the peak? I have a neighbor. Uh,
Brian Green is a best selling author, the elegant universe fabric of the cosmos.
Most recently investor of math at Columbia,
professor of Physics at Columbia pretty much does Columbia.
I asked him your question. I asked him what his time,
if you, if you really pushed me and said, what is time?
I'd say time is that which allows us to see that something has changed.
When you see the second hand in your clock going around,
it's changing position and that's the simplest version of a change corresponding
to time. Elapsing
okay, Robert,
I'm looking at the clock here on the wall and watching second hand and write
these changing positions just as he says now,
I imagine all the clocks in the world agree on what a second is,
but what if we were to take the clocks away? Is there, I mean I would still,
I still in my bones believe that that somewhere there's a clock ticking that
says what a second is.
Same in Mars and yeah, right.
Everybody thinks that cause it's so sensible that time is universally the same
for everyone. Now here's the big secret. Apparently that's not true.
Time is not universal and this is,
Brian is part of Einstein's theory of relativity when we move relative to each
other.
A very basic lesson of relativity is that our watches will tick off time at
different rates. If you have a good watch,
I don't know what a good watch day is, a donut on one,
but if you had a a Rolex watch, I never have owned a watch but right.
You've never owned a wiper on to watch and never liked the idea of a timepiece
sort of taking away on my arm. It really always bothered me, but anyway,
if you had it Rolex and I had a Rolex say and we synchronize them perfectly,
then we move relative to one another and then we rejoin and compare our watches.
They will not agree.
Well to demonstrate what Brian was talking about,
we are now in the central park.
We've got the area entirely roped off because we are going to demonstrate one of
Einstein's famous thought experiments which suggests that the subject and if you
will, I would be the subject, Chad, by all means, et cetera.
You must take a trip at an extraordinarily high speed that's required here.
So if you can help me by giving me whatever you got over there. Uh sure. Uh,
here is a jetpack turbocharged chef fan. Put It on back. Yeah.
Okay. Now take these rollerblades. Oh, okay. Yeah. I'll put one right.
One around left foot, right foot and on your left arm.
The left Jake set the target speed dial and your jet pack to 669 million miles
an hour. It's a little fast.
669 million miles an hour.
What time does your watch say? Five 24 yeah, so it is mine. We are synchronized,
not exactly synchronized when it gets a five 25 in three, two,
one, push the red button, hitting the red button and
I skipped actually going by on this side. I see.
I love the one coming up over there.
You're going by there now by the way,
my watch is absolutely perfectly. I'm having
[inaudible] now
coming closer, coming closer and landed. That was very racing.
Now Robert. Yes. Look at your watch. All right.
What time does it say it's is uh, five 26, with times on your watch?
Five 33. That's a seven minute difference. Is your watch broken? Cause my,
no, no, no, no, no, no. Well, time for you is different than time for me.
You mean the literal,
literally it's not that my watch somehow was shucking up and wasn't functioning
properly.
No time itself is not some universal concept.
Time is held by the individual, by the Observer.
So that if I am moving relative to you, time for me,
a lapse is at a different rate than it does for you.
So relativity says that time and speed are mysteriously coupled.
So the, when I go fast, my time goes slow,
which explains why are watches don't agree exactly.
So this whole notion that we all have the time kind of applies the same to
everybody on earth and Mars, Jupiter,
the entire cosmos that we can see is totally wrong.
But let me ask you this. When you were rushing through space before,
your time is apparently going slower, but did you feel slower?
If I looked at my watch, everything was perfectly normal to me.
My clock was ticking perfectly normal for me. So it was mine in central park.
So what is [inaudible]
if somehow you could appeared in on me up there in outer space,
go in real real fast. I would have seen slower too.
Not only would my watch be ticking slower for you
if we think about,
I mean be be,
oh [inaudible]
so what do you do with this information? What do you mean? Well,
physics teaches us that if I'm say running down the street and my time is
ticking infinitesimally slower than that guy's time over there. Why?
Because he's standing still here and you're running right?
But you're in different time capsules kind of. Yeah. Apparently so.
And I know this is what science tells me, right?
But my common sense tells me that that is completely wrong.
Nothing in my experience tells me this is the case.
This is like one of the great conundrums.
It seems to me that what you learn in science is so different what you feel in
your regular life.
How do you live between those two worlds or what you know and what you feel are
so different? Brian, do you learn to trust your mind over your senses?
Is that what you do? Well,
I learned to trust my senses,
but see them within a much larger framework.
I love to walk down the street and imagine that because I'm walking,
I'm kind of shattering the, the time around me.
I'm causing time to elapse at a different rate than it would if I were standing
still. I love that idea. It's not that I don't trust experience.
You're hitting time square and you're wandering through. You Think, oh boy,
I ain't really changing the universe of all these other people. Well,
I really considered it totally personal, so I'm not changing their tone.
I'm changing. I'm changing the, the rate at which time elapses for me.
So I have power. So when you run to catch a bus, you think, hey,
I've got to get on this bus. Also, I'm slowing down time for my center.
I do sometimes, not always, but it's there. And you know,
when I look at the tabletop, I,
I delight in the fact that I can in my mind picture the atoms and molecules and
the interactions between them in the mostly empty space that's in there and that
when my hand touches the table Top,
I see the electrons in the outer surface of my hand pushing against the
electrons in the outer surface of the table. I'm not really touching the table.
My hand never comes into contact with the table.
What's happening as the electrons are getting really close together and they're
repelling each other,
and I love the fact that I'm in essence deforming the surface of the table by
making my electrons come really close to it. That enriches my experience.
It doesn't, do you hear this with others? Rarely.
Okay.
[inaudible]
public radio, W
this is Radiolab. I'm John. I've, I'm Rod.
We're talking about time today in here with me to help you do that.
Is Robert Krulwich, ABC News and Blah, blah, blah, blah,
blah, blah, blah. Is My specialty, which is are from Brian Green
physicist.
Tell us about a frankly troubling idea that there is no such thing as a standard
time, which I'm still having trouble believing frankly. In any case,
it makes me think of this.
Do you know when you see a tortoise wandering through the garden door and he's
going so slow [inaudible] and then you see a hummingbird with by film?
Clearly they're moving in different tempos,
but perhaps they're also experiencing entirely different universes of time.
Do you ever wonder about that? Right.
I think everybody wonders that, but of course,
unless you are a hummingbird or a tortoise,
you can never really know whether what's going on in your head is different.
True. But Oliver Sacks, the neurologist we met before,
he found a different tempo,
radically different tempos in human beings. Really a,
he's a neurologist and you worked at a hospital in the Bronx.
Still does at Beth Abraham where he once had patients who seemed so slow.
They were almost frozen. He told me about one of those patients named Myron v
for long periods of the day. Mylan would be apparently emotionless.
Although when I looked at him,
I would see his frozen finger in different positions in which his right hand
would be raised.
A lot of these patients would be frozen and all the positions,
which I'm illustrating now,
but don't let it poses hand in the air, but just stuck,
stuck in stuff. People would be stuck in all the poses.
I thought mountain was one of those and I, and I commented on this,
that I had often seen him stuck in these, uh,
photos and posters and he got indignant and said,
what do you mean photos and posers? He said, I wish I was wiping my nose.
And I said, I said, you're joking, putting me on.
And he said, I'm not. And I, and he was,
he was as possible by what I said as I was by what he had said.
But then after he had told me this, I thought, well, hell, you know, I'm,
I must watch this and I must record it. And he said he was just working.
It was just wiping his nose and I was just walking my nose.
Okay. Now that's something that takes me about two seconds. Exactly. Yeah.
Whereas apparently this movement of the arm, if this is what he was doing,
was taking about two hours.
So I took a series of photographs at intervals of a few minutes.
Each of still Myron has his arms gently going up ev apparently still mountain.
How many photographs? I have about 20 photographs or so in two hours.
And then I put them together in a,
it had to fall and then the whole flick pack, you know the,
the way we used to do as a kid, right. And then one couldn't fact see with this,
that fee 20 also photos covering two hours in fact showed a smooth movement to
wipe his nose or movement, which normally it takes two seconds,
but which in him was taking two hours,
although this left open the profound parcel of how come he was not only taking
two hours to do so,
but didn't realize he was taking two hours to do so that the movement,
which to us was glacially slow, was not slow to him, was normal.
Did you ever show
Myron the pictures that you had made? Yes. And didn't,
did you say, so Myron, look at this, it took you two hours to do this.
I mean, if you did that then
what did he say? Um, uh, he was astonished and that's too mild a word.
He was thunderstruck
[inaudible]
wow.
So Myron had no idea that he was experiencing the world slower than the rest of
us. Not into all of our staple, all the pictures.
Do we flip book and go and spit up time and then Myron can see what it was he
was doing. But you know,
does a turtle know that he's processing slowly?
Does a hummingbird know that it's processing fast? I don't. I don't think so.
Huh. But he, in this case,
we now know that this is a human being absorbing and performing a drastically
different tempos from the rest of humanity.
[inaudible]
Oliver has another patient did it, likes to talk about, her name
is Hester y and Hesta.
She would have the opposite of the slowing or glaciation.
She would move with extreme speed. And uh, this came out very,
very clearly.
Sometimes when I had these students play ball with Hesta,
does that mean um, they catch you? Yeah, they play catch. I'm sorry.
Is that the wrong word? Ball Bruce?
One of the striking things when people are Parkinsonian is when people may
appear unable to initiate any action they can reciprocate.
And if you suddenly throw a ball to someone of parkinsonism,
even if they appear absolutely frozen, they will catch it.
And often I would demonstrate this to the students.
I would usually have seven or eight students and we would usually sit in a
semicircle around the patient.
So hesta would be in her chair with a semicircle students facing her.
And she was,
she was so quick and the ball came back and hit the student on his throwing
hands. Wow.
So the guy throws the bullet Hester,
she catches the ball and throws it back before he's even put his hand back in
place. Just so how many times faster is Hester moving than the students?
Um, well, let me put it in general terms.
Her reaction time is a 10th of a second or less.
And usually the best reaction times have Olympic athletes is about a seventh of
a second. Anyhow, the ball came back very,
very fast and I would say to Hesta, slow down. You're too quick for them.
Why don't you count up to 10 pause before you throw the ball back.
Count up to 10. She's still in her very speedy mode was like, okay, okay.
And the ball would come back, scarcity slower.
And I would say I asked you to count up to 10 and in a voice,
which I really can't imitate, but this is the crushed voice.
The technical term is tech, Ophelia [inaudible] speech, uh,
and the crushed voice of extreme parkinsonism.
[inaudible] Hopson I can't speak quick enough for that. And her brain,
was she thinking that she was giving normal speech? Yeah,
she was no more conscious of her speed than mountain was of his slowness.
[inaudible]
Huh?
So Myron has somehow slipped into whale time or turtle time because of the
disease,
which sent Hester in the opposite direction into a kind of hummingbird tempo.
Do you think there's a limit to this?
How fast she can go or how slow he must be.
Like some kind of physical limits.
If she wanted to say 20,000 words in a second and could even get her brain to do
so, her mouth wouldn't work that her tongue wouldn't work that fast.
So there's constraints like gravity, energy, the nature of your body.
So there we are, the rest of us, uh, what kind of range is available to Uri
[inaudible]
I am not sure that such a radical slowing speedings occur in the rest of us,
except perhaps in very unusual circumstances,
perhaps in sports and perhaps in situations of, of mortal danger.
People who are in the zone,
they may give descriptions of what appears to be a baseball comes towards one at
a hundred miles an hour, but some batters they call it batters. Yeah.
Okay. Um, uh, people at Bat. Okay.
But people at Bat may say that the Borg seem to come to them more slowly and
they could see the seams on the ball
in the zone. Robert, I just so happen to have something here,
which is a perfect illustration of what he's talking about.
[inaudible] except it's not baseball has to do with track tracks. Good.
Here's the short extra.
When I'm up they call my name, I step up on the runway.
Usually it's just [inaudible] relax,
you are the best plant and I don't think anything else after that.
I want that adrenaline coming.
When he says let us take the mark cause I only got 10 seconds at one 90 seconds
at at that point, you know.
But if this pump and pump and pump and pump and then they say take your mark
when I'm exhausted. You know,
once I get numb blocks it's like I don't want to be exhausted.
I want to be on fire at that moment. So I'm like I'm ready. I'm ready.
Tim's just 52 degrees,
50 degrees out here and bod is warmed up sitting in the Blas and like colon in
any phrasing me,
I don't even feel no cold cause I got so much adrenaline going through my body.
I'm just ready to put it to them today. Put everybody
and if you're not ready,
it doesn't matter at this point because you have to be Rick.
And when he says set, sit, sit in that bait gun,
go out, all you got, you just,
just take it off from you're done. Just hold on.
You go feel the strength that day. [inaudible] go slow down,
no fatigue and nothing's going to come over.
Whoever's in the lanes behind they go get it. And just listening, get in tune,
get in tune, listen to the whole question of the crowd is get quiet for the gun.
In that moment when they say, take your mark set, I become the gun.
So when that gun fires,
it's almost like I'm the bullet being fired out of the pistol.
And that's my reaction. When I hear that sound,
it's almost like there's a firing pin smacking me in my butt and pushing me.
So it's not that I sound out everything around me.
I've already sounded out everything because I'm the bullet and it's only me in
the chamber. You line up,
you hear the guy men say fit and at that point you become blind and deaf because
you don't,
you don't go off of what you think you've heard because if you do that you just
lost the race. You have to be one with the gun. And when he says set,
I just breathe all the air and I take a deep inhale,
take one last look on the competitors in the lane, know focused,
just take a drive and go drive and go. And then I hold my breath and then
[inaudible] I let all the air out.
That's when I started running as fast as I can.
When you're running and you're so relaxed in what you do
to where a song can just pop into your mind about 30 meters,
that is the ultimate point I think the athlete wants to be.
Cause that's when you get that peak performance.
It's almost like everything is moving in slow motion and you watching the birds
kind of slowly fly by and you hear that song just whistle in the yet year.
When I take off and I start to climb in the air, it all goes pretty fast,
but once I hit that apex of the jump and my hips are up over the bar,
time really slows down.
I mean you can just feel this rotation and it feels like someone's grabbed a
hold of your hips and really giving you a push,
a boost up in the air and for this moment that you're sort of suspended on top
of the bar. It's really serene. It's really almost peaceful.
It just seems like it lasts an eternity.
Come off the turn. I'm in the front,
I'm in the front and nobody coming from me to stop and do that. Cheetah,
I'm in the front, so I'm just thinking, just get away. Just get away.
Just get away, tone out the, hold on, hold on. Just stretch it out. Start.
Get your top of her tone afterwards. Hold on, hold on.
Hold on though.
Is happening and trying to get your ideas that you defined them off to be fine
at the end. Yes, yes. Compete, compete,
compete mainly at the Tate and goals.
Then they put them on across the largest smile. I was smiling.
Get down to the tape.
Yeah.
Well that's, that's kind of stuff I live for.
I live for those intense moments like there again,
it's hard to excel the fence. Sometimes they too are human,
but it's true and I've had a heart surgery in year 2000 but as athletes and you
can ask almost any athlete,
they'll tell you we believe we're invincible because if we go in there with any
other thought,
there's no chance of us compensating because we have to believe.
We have to confuse ourselves into believing that no matter what's wrong with you
or what you're dealing with is not going to be a factor to what you're trying to
accomplish.
We believe we're invisible.
Thanks for the next big thing and sound artists.
Ben Ruben for that a piece he produced for the national track and Field Hall of
fame, you can visit them on the web@trackhall.com so Robert,
what do you think this was a case?
I think of athletes showing you how we contest with time get power by mastering
time shaving. It's slightly time and power, have a long history.
That's what we'll look at shortly. I'm jacked up on Ron Robert Krulwich.
Now back in a moment
to you're the same to radio lab.
Hi, I'm Bill Schiller from Oak Harbor. Washington.
Radiolab is supported in part by the National Science Foundation and by the
Alfred p Sloan Foundation enhancing public understanding of science and
technology in the modern world.
More information about Sloan at www dot Sloan dot [inaudible]
org.
This is Radiolab. I'm Chad. Boom. Rod. My guest today is Robert Crowe,
which the science correspondent for ABC News,
Nova and Nightline and we're talking about time,
the freezing of the speeding up of the slung down of the absorbed science of
another politics of time. Speaking of which my interview with,
remember Jay Griffiths when we heard in the previous section, she began
her interview with me with a strange declaration which she read off a piece of
paper.
This is the independent free state of troll. Haim,
we have no allegiance to the government. We do not recognize history,
patriarchy, matriarchy politics, communist, fascist or lollipop men or ladies.
We have a hierarchy based on dog worship.
Our currency is to be based on the cog barter system.
We do not recognize the Gregorian calendar by doing so this day shall be known
as one. Be Afraid, be afraid, all that here,
respect this date. What was that?
That was the manifesto of um,
British anti road protests in the mid nineties.
The British anti road protest? Yes. Like roads. Yes.
Environmentalist who were protesting against the building of roads and one of
the things that they chose to do was to write this self-governing manifesto.
Pointing out that for them they were not going to recognize Greenwich Mean Time,
three hours, 44 minutes. I reckon they did. Universal time.
Time is a highly political subject.
It initially was the British sense of time,
which was transported all over the world.
Britons ruled their empire through ruling the oceans.
They rule the oceans because they discovered chronometer as of sufficient
accuracy to discover longitude.
What the British did in their empires was to insist on GMT,
Greenwich Meantime, and you know,
the that are the countries where sort of [inaudible] Greenwich mean time
retarded a bit or advanced a bit, but essentially
[inaudible] was a real slam in London and [inaudible] questions the British
don't on the season anymore, but we all still use Greenwich mean time.
So absolutely.
We're very used to thinking that empires are to do with land.
What I'm arguing is that actually though there have been empires of time
[inaudible],
there's one story you tell about the rulers.
This is the ruler of trick menace than the current ruler of Turkmenistan.
A guy named president Neosoft.
Now the month of January in Turkmenistan is called Turkmenbashi and the month of
April is called Gerben. [inaudible]. Why are they called that?
Well, he named one after himself and one after his mother.
You mean everybody there? So in January calls it, you know,
president of our country month, whatever. Well,
I don't actually know whether you know that it's taken off in the street as it
were and I rather suspect it probably hasn't. But what he wanted to do was,
what in fact many rulers have run to do is to ally themselves with the clock and
the calendar. I mean, like Paul Pot decided that 97, 55 years zero,
Paul Potts says, all right, everything starts with me. Yes, exactly.
Everything starts with me.
Now when I say it does this is year zero and to you, I guess
the joy of time, the deepest, most ecstatic version of
it is when you lose it completely. I think that's absolutely right.
And I think that's something that, um, you know,
that in prayer and meditation in art, um,
and in love actually is that people lose that. Um, very,
um, you know,
fretful ticking off kind of sense of clock time and what you fall into,
um, is, is something transcendent. You know,
all that you have to have done is loved somebody to know that and to hold them
for half an hour.
And you could know that that half an hour has lasted an eternity
time. Standing still in a moment like that is like a,
a really swollen now.
Yes, exactly. Exactly. And that in a sense, you know, that's when, um,
the moment meets the eternal th that that is all that matters is just this
moment that you're holding in your hand.
Thanks Robert. That was great. Yeah. Thank you.
Jay Griffiths is the author of a sideways look at time.
You can find out more about her on our website,
radiolab.org we'll close our program today on time.
The way we started with an excerpt of the performance is Beethoven's ninth
symphony.
You know the one [inaudible] except this is not the way Beethoven would have
intended it to be performed.
The piece he wrote to last 70 minutes has been stretched to 24 hours.
24 hours. Yup. Bringing it even closer to eternity.
Recently a group of San Franciscans spent an entire weekend in a gallery in a
trance listening to all 24 hours and began on a Friday evening.
It is one oh two in the morning through the light all night.
So it's about three 45 in the morning, three 55
in the morning, like in the morning.
Sound artist.
Aaron Zim was there otherwise known as the quiet American performances at his
gallery. In fact, close our show today.
We asked him to give us a taste of what it sounded like. It starts with his
[inaudible] and then that I'm Duh, Duh, Duh Duh Duh Duh. But you know,
here it's like mm.
Even though it's like a very simple thing to do to like say, okay,
it's not going to be 90 minutes, it's going to be a day. It,
it still gives you that sense of floating time or hanging time at a time that
uh, that takes a long time to pass that you haven't certain places in your life
where major thing happens. You know? Volks that's
[inaudible]
you know how people report that, uh, you,
your life flashes before your eyes in a car crash or something like that.
Time seem to slow down for people.
It's like these really tense moments when if you happen to be playing
Beethoven's ninth symphony on like a, your car stereo,
well you were into some car crash or something.
Would it slow down and sound like this?
[inaudible]
the idea was to stretch something to 24 hours by stretching Beethoven's ninth I
don't only Rach a piece of music stretch music history. Oh God,
Beethoven for 24 hours.
I'm just wondering if Beethoven is slowly spinning in his grave. Low Finger.
That's my name here in San Francisco this weekend. This is [inaudible]
second fool 24 over performance upstairs where the performance is going on has a
good five. Everything seems very gentle.
If Laura is completely covered with bean bags or pillows,
this space has a really amazing acoustic sound system. He was really good.
What can I say? Designed to be contemplative. Why would I do this?
I have no idea why. When doing it you will. I do it again. I don't know.
I want to see how I feel being exposed to one unique pieces.
First responses, very calming response.
And then when I walked in and then I came in, I thought it was,
I wanted to stretch, open up and
expand
[inaudible] [inaudible]
so I had this thought that different animals based on probably their size and
their heart rate might have different senses of time.
Like you see a hummingbird zipping around in this manic way and you think we
humans must seem very slow to that hummingbird.
Everything we do must almost be in slow motion to something that can just deal
with things that quickly and to a whale or some huge animal with a heart rate
that is like once every few minutes, we must seem really fast.
This piece is kind of like that.
Suddenly I felt like I was moving at hummingbird speed touchdown.
It's getting this growing and growing and growing and you're just wanting a tick
and it's not going to right. It is rather,
it is climaxing but it's just taking place over such a long time.
That to us in our little small human time,
it doesn't feel like it's climaxing and it's true. It doesn't really,
the climax never really happens.
It's like you flare. Right Steve. Nice people. That's why, I don't know.
Maybe somebody else ran out screaming. I'm really biased. I'm serious.
Oh, it's like an ecstatic. Other times
it felt like between them and continued to [inaudible] was lifted up for sure.
Just a constant lifted with them. There was no end.
Just a constant lifting, lifting.
[inaudible]
just got quiet. Yeah.
It sounded like it was supposed to go quiet there. Yeah,
it'll be a stretched out quiet. Yeah. It's probably just like a rest.
Yeah. However many times.
Longer camps. Again,
[inaudible]
that was produced by sound artist, Aaron Zim with help from Bronwyn's,
him and Jeremiah Moore. You can find more of Aaron's work on our website,
radiolab.org chat.
I was actually going to be the long a vowel and the all the mention sequence
that I was unable to make it to San Francisco.
I guess we got to get out of here. Yeah, we should close the show.
This week's show was produced by myself and Ellen Horn.